# Testing the Mean
Note that all the tests covered here are essentially derived from the likelihood ratio test. Remember that for all tests here, we can also directly work with their respective distributions instead of considering the critical region. For example for unknown mean, we can calculate the statistic $(n-1)S^2/\sigma^2_0$ and since we know this is a $\chi^2_{n-1}$ distribution we can simply compare with it and its corresponding significance level.
## Known Variance: $z$-test
This is essentially what we have been doing so far, we standardize and find the appropriate z score and reject or not based on the significance level. 
$$Z=\frac{\sqrt{n}(\bar{X}-\mu)}{\sigma}\sim N(0,1)$$We can also do it based on critical regions. To summarize:
- $H_0: \mu \leq \mu_0$ vs. $H_1: \mu>\mu_0$ (one-sided alternative); here, the UMP test at a significance level $\alpha$ is determined by the critical region (i.e. the rejection rule)
$$
\bar{X}>\mu_0+\frac{z(\alpha) \sigma}{\sqrt{n}} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
- Likewise, for a "mirror" version $H_0: \mu \geq \mu_0$ vs. $H_1: \mu<\mu_0$, the UMP test at a significance level $\alpha$ is determined by the critical region
$$
\bar{X}<\mu_0-\frac{z(\alpha) \sigma}{\sqrt{n}} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
- $H_0: \mu=\mu_0$ vs. $H_1: \mu \neq \mu_0$ (two-sided alternative); here, the UMP test in the class of unbiased tests is
$$
\left|\bar{X}-\mu_0\right|>\frac{z(\alpha / 2) \sigma}{\sqrt{n}} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
## Unknown Variance: $t$-test
If the variance is unknown, we estimate it by the sample variance $S^2$. Instead of using the standardized $Z$ value, we use the $t$-ratio due to Student's Theorem.
$$T=\frac{\sqrt{n}(\bar{X}-\mu)}{S}\sim t_{n-1}$$
- $H_0: \mu \leq \mu_0$ vs. $H_1: \mu>\mu_0$ :
$$
\bar{X}>\mu_0+\frac{t_{n-1}(\alpha) S}{\sqrt{n}} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
- $H_0: \mu \geq \mu_0$ vs. $H_1: \mu<\mu_0$ :
$$
\bar{X}<\mu_0-\frac{t_{n-1}(\alpha) S}{\sqrt{n}} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
- $H_0: \mu=\mu_0$ vs. $H_1: \mu \neq \mu_0$ :
$$
\left|\bar{X}-\mu_0\right|>\frac{t_{n-1}(\alpha / 2) S}{\sqrt{n}} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
# Testing the Variance
## Known Mean
If the random sample is from a normal distribution $N(\mu,\sigma^2)$ with known mean and unknown variance, we can estimate the variance using the MLE estimator:
$$\hat{\sigma}^2=\frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n(X_i-\mu)^2$$
Consider the following hypothesis
- $H_0:0<\sigma^2\leq\sigma_0^2$ vs $H_1:\sigma^2>\sigma^2_0$ :
  Clearly large values of the estimator $\hat{\sigma}^2$ would discredit the null hypothesis, so it is natural to use a critical region of the form, where c is as usual determined from the significance level 
$$\hat{\sigma}^2>c\Rightarrow \text{reject }H_0 $$
  To find the threshold from the significance level we note that
$$Z_i=\frac{X_i-\mu}{\sigma}\sim N(0,1)$$
$$Z_i^2=\frac{(X_i-\mu)^2}{\sigma^2}$$
  Therefore taking the sum:
$$\sum^n_{i=1}Z_i^2=\frac{n\hat{\sigma}^2}{\sigma^2}\sim \chi^2_n$$
  Then since we have $\hat{\sigma}^2>c$
$$\frac{n\hat{\sigma}^2}{\sigma^2}>\frac{nc}{\sigma^2}$$
  We want that the probability of this occurring is equal to the significance level, so we deduce that
$$c = \frac{\chi^2_n(\alpha)\sigma^2_0}{n}$$
  So we arrive at the critical region
$$\hat{\sigma}^2>\frac{\chi^2_n(\alpha)\sigma^2_0}{n}\Rightarrow \text{reject }H_0$$
We can now list two other testing scenarios, with the corresponding critical regions:
- $H_0: \sigma^2 \geq \sigma_0^2$ vs. $H_1: 0<\sigma^2<\sigma_0^2$ :
$$
\hat{\sigma}^2<\frac{\chi_n^2(1-\alpha) \sigma_0^2}{n} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
  where $\chi_n^2(1-\alpha)$ is the upper $(1-\alpha)$-quantile of $\chi_n^2$-distribution (which is the same as the lower $\alpha$-quantile).
- $H_0: \sigma^2=\sigma_0^2$ vs. $H_1: \sigma^2 \neq \sigma_0^2$ :
$$
\hat{\sigma}^2<\frac{\chi_n^2(1-\alpha / 2) \sigma_0^2}{n} \text { or } \hat{\sigma}^2>\frac{\chi_n^2(\alpha / 2) \sigma_0^2}{n} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
## Unknown Mean
If we the mean of the normal distribution $N(\mu,\sigma^2)$ is unknown, we estimate $\sigma^2$ using the sample variance
$$S^2=\frac{1}{n-1}\sum_{i=1}^n(X_i-\bar{X})^2$$
By Student's Theorem:
$$\frac{(n-1)S^2}{\sigma^2}\sim \chi^2_{n-1}$$
Using a very similar derivation from the previous section with known mean, we arrive at the following tests:
- $H_0: 0<\sigma^2 \leq \sigma_0^2$ vs. $H_1: \sigma^2>\sigma_0^2$ :
$$
S^2>\frac{\chi_{n-1}^2(\alpha) \sigma_0^2}{n-1} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
- $H_0: \sigma^2 \geq \sigma_0^2$ vs. $H_1: 0<\sigma^2<\sigma_0^2$ :
$$
S^2<\frac{\chi_{n-1}^2(1-\alpha) \sigma_0^2}{n-1} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
- $H_0: \sigma^2=\sigma_0^2$ vs. $H_1: \sigma^2 \neq \sigma_0^2$ :
$$
S^2<\frac{\chi_{n-1}^2(1-\alpha / 2) \sigma_0^2}{n-1} \text { or } S^2>\frac{\chi_{n-1}^2(\alpha / 2) \sigma_0^2}{n-1} \Rightarrow \text { reject } H_0
$$
# 